# Little personal but still important

Everyone has their own story. Knowingly that more challenges,
experiences awaiting for me in the future, i want to share my couple
cents on helping someone to never lose hope and fight for your future. I
got interested in chemistry in high school years and even had my own
room to study. I didn't have to attend regular classes because school
wanted me to represent them in the national olympiads. That lead me to
study abroad (Istanbul, Turkey) and pursue chemistry as a career. But
overtime things got changed, i couldn't enjoy classes. I felt like i
knew most of the topics already from back in days competing in
olympiads. So i started looking for other inspirations. Luckily not bad
ones. Even though i used to sit and study a lot, because of my fathers
genetics (he was a pro wrestler) i had a good sense and enthusiast in
all kinds of sports. In Turkey most of the students/teenagers play
soccer so it got curiosity out of me. I got rejected from teams my
inital years. But iny my final years in univeristy i was able to get
into a soccer team that ended up representing our city. At that time
that was a huge achievement for me. At that point i understood if i
believe in something and give my best there is nothing to stop me. You
might not be a legend but you will be your best at one thing and believe
me you will be proud of it. That will affect your upcoming decisions in
your life.

Now sports aside, i remember thinking how to spent my evenings
effectively. Becuase i lost my motivation to chemistry i had to find
somehting in replace. Science was always a big part of life. But now
thats gone. Thanks to internet i was able to find something that i
enjoyed. I wasn't in Silicon Valley at that time so few people used to
talk about technology in my circle. I started spending hours just
creating static webpages with HTML/CSS. Even though they weren't
functional, i just loved the way they looked. Long story short that
curiosity got me into unpaid internships, even unpaid full time jobs and
doing my masters in CS. Taking money from my parents when you passed 20
years was not an option. So, i got a loan of 3k\$ in my home country and
flew to United States to pursue my masters. I paid off that loan in 2
years. If i knew at that time that these decisions are going to be tough
experiences. But learnt to never complain. After arriving to Missouri i
had to pay my school a good amount of money for 3 month. In my first
month i understood i can't afford that. I was miserable because in my
home country i had everything. My family was well funded. But i always
wanted to build my life on my own. After that 1st semester transferred
to cheaper grad school in Chicago. I was a bit releaved financially but
worst thing was waiting for me. After first semester school told us that
they couldn't get accrediation from goverenment so they told us to
transfer or wait until the end of semester. By that time i was working
on CPT outside the school and that allowed me to be flexible to some
point. Most of the schools don't have a right to offer CPTs from the
first semester so i had to stay otherwise i will lose my job which will
lead me to lose everyhting. One day grad school told me that they are in
talks with Roosevelt Unviversity and Chicago State University. I ended
up chosing Roosevlet University because it was closer to where i live
and it was private. Hardest thing in this journey is not always
financial situations. Its the standard you put in yourself. Always try
to be the best at what you do and set expectations properly so you don't
get burned out or discoureged.

## Technical Part

Throught these years i was lucky enough to have a motivation to discover
and improve myself continuously. I put up these links together because i
am seeing a lot of bootcamps or short term school graduates lacking the
depth kmowledge. Prioratize the topics and study better.

1. If you are lacking in CS concepts. Refere to:

   - [teach yourself cs](https://teachyourselfcs.com/?fbclid=IwAR1uoQtwyofWos9BpDtIfOQKcq9vKx8uc4ae6neNLcT-dTFp3-jIUElq6wg#algorithms)

2. Read also more about APIs and HTTP protocols. Either you want to
   learn GraphQL or Rest API they all valuable knowledge for any engineer.

   - [HTTP MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Overview)
   - [GraphQL](https://graphql.org/learn/)
   - [Restful](https://restfulapi.net/)

3. Then all comes down to who want to be? Front End / Back End / Full
   Stack / Data / Mobile / Android / DevOps Engineer or Data Scientist and
   so on.

   - [front-end vs back-end vs full-stack](https://medium.com/level-up-web/front-end-vs-back-end-vs-full-stack-development-78267f545121)

4. After that you have to choose language and tools for that particular
   career. Assuming you already grasp CS knowledge. This topics is a little
   bit tricky because tools may change or disepear overtime. In general
   chose one of the core languages for back end [Java, Python, C, C++, C#,
   Ruby, PHP etc]. For front end consider [JavaScript/TypeScript, HTML/CSS,
   NodeJs (you can use this in backend too)]

5. After you learn basics of language pick up frameworks and tools.
   Choose either one or more by researching the market or the you ones
   loved. Here i will write tools that i have familiraity with. Python
   [Flask, Django]. FrontEnd [ReacJS, AngularJS, VueJS, EmberJS, Express,
   Bootstrap etc]. After you chosen a library or framework learn every
   library that related to that framework.

6. Learn testing Frontend [Jest, Jasime, Chai etc] Python [unittesting,
   pytest etc]

7. If you are more inclined backend please learn also SQL. You will be
   dealing with databases soon or later. Databases also keep changing.
   First learn relational databases [MySQL, Oracle etc] then chose
   according to your career. For example you might like or you company
   might use NoSQL database like MongoDB. Or your company might use SQLite
   in conjuction with Python. If you are more towards to data science then
   consider learning how you can use Pandas with/over SQL. My company used
   graph database for example and i had to learn neo4j for that. But
   overall syntax won't be too dramatic if you learn well relational
   databases.

   - [SQL Basics](https://www.w3schools.com/sql/)
   - [MongoDB Docs](https://docs.mongodb.com/)
   - [Pandas vs SQL statements](https://medium.com/jbennetcodes/how-to-rewrite-your-sql-queries-in-pandas-and-more-149d341fc53e)

8. Always keep sharp your knowledge of data structures and algorithms.
   That will help you on the long run.

   - [data structures and algorithms guide](https://www.interviewcake.com/data-structures-and-algorithms-guide?utm_source=triplebyte)
   - [mit.edu](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-006-introduction-to-algorithms-fall-2011/lecture-videos/)
   - [jwasham github](https://github.com/jwasham/coding-interview-university#data-structures)
   - [Skiena The Algorithm Design Manual](http://mimoza.marmara.edu.tr/~msakalli/cse706_12/SkienaTheAlgorithmDesignManual.pdf)
   - [leetcode](https://leetcode.com/)
   - [https://www.glassdoor.com](glassdoor)

9. If you want to study interactively for your interviews utilize
   platforms like pramp.com / interviewing.io / testdome.com

   - [pramp.com](https://www.pramp.com)
   - [interviewing.io](https://interviewing.io/)
   - [testdome.com](https://www.testdome.com)

10. Finally, try to do as many side projects as possible. Even if it
    doesn't make sense at the beggining. You can't master one thing by just
    passively watching videos. Put project on the side and try to implement
    new features you learned to that project.

##### Good luck in your endeavours!
